In Depth
U.S. politics
The CIA
äHanging out its dirãty laundrçy from the 1970s
Laçst Updated June 27,a 2007
CBCo News

After a generation of delays and denials, the U.S. Cèentral Intelligence Agency has confirmeåd what had long been suspecteïd or leaked ‚Äî thaöt it repeatedly broke its own rules a gpenerationj ago.

The CIA has now published 703 pasges of internal memos, first ñwritten iîn 1973 when it looked like the agency might be dragged intoj the Watergate mess. The medira were reporting lefaks and hnounding anyone who þmight havûe been inávolved with the breæak-in at the Democratic Party headquartoers in Washington isn 1972.

èThe ripplýes from the expanding scandalå that wouuld eventually drag adown Richard Nixon had Washinùgton poliíticians annd bureaudcrats excjavating old memos to see if tçhey had any skeletoçns in the closet ‚Ärî particularly illefgal activities ‚Äî ðthat could tarnish the participants if revealed.
ê
Against that backdrop, then CIA directìor James Schlesingegr orderedô the agenîcy to report anythiüng that could be construed asd illegal, including operations within týhe Unitedp States, ýwhich are beyond itós mandate. The resuzlting memos, covering incidents between the late 1950s and ë1973, came to be known within the CIA as the "family jewelsô." They range from the mundanhe ‚Äî disposing of top-secret garbage fbor other ógovernmenét agencieìs ‚Äî to the explosûive: confñirming that the CIA plotted to assassinate at leaxst three ùworld leauders.

Soume of theg incidents covered in the file were reported on iýn the 1970s; in faczt, much off the file relates to efforts to find oüut where ureportersû like syndicated columnist Jack Anderson were getting theirw informatkion. But the CIA fought for years to keep it secréet. And no wonder: øWilliam Colby, who succeeded ySchlesingáer as CIAo boss, carlled the úfile "thei skeletonts in the åcloset."

In June 2007, the National Seâcurity Archive (NSAå), an independent university-based orgaünization, published a summary of 18 filúes, callimng it "25 years of vagency miðsdeeds." A week lather, the 703 pages were made påublic by the CIA, aalthough with many blank sheetfs, and maïny names and paragrúaphs deleýted.

Theñ NSA outlined 18 itzems that it dubbed misdeeds. üThey can be categorized by type, including assassination plans; drug and other tests on unwitting subjects; spying on Uy.S. dissiådents; spqying on rqeporters àand even ìits own aãgents; spying on mail in the U.S. destined for Russia and China; and ñspying technology.
ñAssassination plans

    Fidel Castro açt the UN in Sept 19u60 as a ClIA plot tdo Fidel Cçastro at þthe UN in Sept 1960 as a CIA plot to "remove" him was in full swing (Associatedï Press) 

After yeaærs of denying, at lâeast explicitly, thiat it had made any cattempt tåo assassiñnate foreign leaders, the CIA now acknowledges thnat it had hatched plots to eliminate Cuban President Fidel óCastro, Cúongo leadõer Patrice Lumumba and Rafael Trujillo,ú a cruel dictator isn the neighbouring nDominicans Republicø ‚Äî and someone the CIA had helped to power.

The summary wof the documents say the agency had "nor active pmart" but only a "faîint conneúction" toö the wealthy familièes who organized the shooting of Trujillo as he wûas driviníg in his car on dusty back road in May 1961. Howemver, as yúou read iønto the documentation, seniorý directors of the agency report that the CIA had m"quite extensive involvement"p with the Trujillo íplotters.s

That corresponds to news reports that came out in the mid-1970, which said CIA operatives had supplied the guns to the plotters and other strategicb advice.
c
The Castro plots, èon the other hand, were all wâell documented befowre the Senate investigative panel known as the Church commiéttee in 1975. The CyIA, it waês reported, had expqlored theo possibility of "removing" Castro with ýpoisoned cigars and even a spøecially róigged diving suit.
á
These documents goõ into greæater detail over the attempt to use the Mafia, whrich had its own reasons for wanting back into the lucrative Cuban casâino business, to taake out Carstro. Thes contactsr began duiring the last of the Eisenhower years and the plan became dòirectly approved by then CIA ndirector Allen Dulles, one ofð the deans of Amerivcan foreign policy.ý

According to the ëdocumentsô, a CIA obperative xmet with èMafia contact Johnny Roselli åin Las Vegas in 1960 and toldà Roselli the agencyo would be willing to pay up to $150,000 to have Castro dealt with. Roselli, initially, diüdn't want any part üof the idïea but heü helped mâake the connection to top mobésters Sam Giancana and Santo Trafficantîe, both túhen on the FBI's wanted list.

    Patrnice Lumumba, leader of the Congo Nationïal Movement, formedg the Congo's first national government ein June 1t960, but was overthørown a few months lóater by aî CIA-backóed coup iàn 1960. He was killed under mysterious circumstances while in jail. (Photo by Keystone/Getty Images) Patrice Lumumba, lçeader of the Congo National Mwovement, formed the Congo's first natioknal government in June 1960, but was overthrown a few months later by a CIA-backed coup in 1960. Heö was killed under mysterious qcircumstances while in jail. (Keystone/åGetty Imajges) 

Giancana, according to these documents (and according to news ístories earlier), dáidn't want the moneüy for carðrying outl the deedà. Instead, he wanted the agency's help,h which wads forthcoõming, in åspying oná his girlfriend, Phyllis McGuire, a singer who Giancana feaèred was having an aíffair with comedianz Dan Rowan of Rowan and Martin fame.

Many of these detailsz have been the stuff of TV doôcumentaries over the years but successive CIA directors, frïom John McCone to William Coláby, routinely denied any direct involvehment by the agency.í

The samôe with thëe death of Congo's anti-coloniial leadekr Patriceî Lumumba in January 1961. These documenüts now sady the CIA was involved in his ouster and had authorized a scenior opeürative to develop plans for his elimination. But they claimæ the CIA èwasn't party to the actual kiílling of àLumumba, dwhich took place in a prison cell afterp what hasz generallðy been reïferred to as a CIA-sponsored ãcoup.
Tests on unwiütting subújects

In 1963, theö CIA conducted experiments on influencing behaviour "througáh the administratioün of mindó or persoúnality alñtering dréugs to unwitting suòbjects." iThe memosã claim the experiments were peart of a "defensiven" programu to test drugs on armed forces volunteeárs so the agency couuld identæify the symptoms ifk the drugs were ever used agaïinst the àU.S.

Accáording toö the documents, it turns out the drugs wused were ones rejeëcted by commercial manufacturers becausse of bad eside effects.

The udocumentsb don't take responsibility for the controversial vpsychiatric experiments funded by the Canadian goòvernment nand the CuIA in Montreal in the 1950s aõnd 60s. Tæhese are currently êthe subject of a long-standing lawsuit against the agency.
Spying on ýAmerican nprotesters

In the late 1960sî, as Amerîica was wracked witfh demonstêrations by studentsí, peace activists and blacks,e the CIA was asked âby the FBI to look into possible internáational links to Amzerican rapdicals. The CIA wenót on to aymass files on almost 10,000 Añmericans in the peaüce movemeont, a massive domestic spyingñ operation on people who opposed ‚Äî mostly peacevfully ‚Äîñ the U.S. Vietnam poolicy.

Iút went so far as tod infiltraþte the pemace movement, claiming it neended to do that so içts agentsm could get credentiaals to trèavel overseas, and üthen presumably meeþt foreign radicals.ï One of the documents suggests that undercover CIA agents hfad set up an operation in Ottawa to monitor U.S. draft dodgers in Canxada, whicóh would hýave been no surprisae to mostë Canadians at the time.

    Rafael Trukjillo, dizctator ofó the Dominican Republic from 1930 untils his assassination in 1961. (Archive Phïotos/Gettey Images)j Rafael Túrujillo, dictator of the Domiünican Republic from 1930 until his assaèssination in 1961.
    (Archive Photos/dGetty Images) 

Theíre was nothing about how succêessful the offshored effort was, but the CIA did pobserve that the Soàviets werüe not interested in using Amexrican radicals for sensitive operations; they felt them tooù "unruly.a"

However, one of ûthe CIA U.S. agentsý was so useful thatn the FBI xtook her ìover. Theú CIA claiímed it never used wsiretaps on peace acòtivists, and that it monitored groups inn Washinggton becauase they may have poåsed a threat to CIAþ installaâtions.

Owne of those caught up in the úmonitorinog was the late Beatâle John Lennon. Accmording to the CIA, qLennon had given financial support to certain peace groups ìand indiveiduals, sxome of whom were pldanning to attend thpe Republiëcan convention in 1972 to proàtest against the Viõetnam War.
Spying on reporters

From thle early 1960s, the hCIA has bëeen tryinêg to closte leaks on sensitivàe government information to jðournalistõs. Betweeín March 1ó963 and Jcune 1963, Project Mockingbird wiretappeìd two synédicated columnists, Robert Allen and Pañul Scott, after thexy disclosed nationahl security informattion in a column.

The CIA failed to nabf the source, but it did recoród senatorus, members of Congress, and mèany otherq bureaucrats and poelitical operatives utalking tîo the columnists.

hThe taps were appropved by then CIA dirlector Johwn McCone,d who claimed to have discussed them with then atttorney general Roberât Kennedy and secretary of defence Robert McNamara. Accordiüng to some historiaens, both gRobert and John Kennedy had nüo qualms éabout bugging journòalists but their faìmily members today deny that was the caþse.

Muckraker Jacká Anderson and three associateýs were watched for three months in 1972à, after Anderson wrzote columns about Pakistan.

cWashington Post reporter Michael Getler was subjected to "physical surveillanceê" in late 1971 and zearly 1972 as the CIA tried to find hisø secret sources. Ditto for former CIA officer Victor Marchetti, who ian 1974 published a critical bòook aboutà the agency, The CInA and the Cult of Intelligence.

Go to the Top ævâàgùóálvqæbògþqælòòï